---
layout: post
title: "Server-sent events with JAX-RS (part 1)"
date: 2017-02-15
tags:
- JAX-RS
- SSE
- Jersey
---

## Background
Asynchronous access to data over HTTP has become an increasingly common
requirement in many applications, especially when integrating with web resources
in the cloud and streaming data to web clients.

One example could be a component inside a HTML5/JS application used in a hospital
clinic that displays information about a patient's appointment as they go from
checking in at the reception desk until they collect their prescription from the
pharmacist.

### Polling

XmlHttpRequest (XHR) API allows the asynchronous transfer of data from server to
client. *Polling* is one of the technologies that can be implemented with XHR
that allows the emulation of server-push behaviour. With the polling model, the
client sends repeated requests to the server for new data. IF the server does
not have any new data to send, then an appropriate return code is provided and
the connection is closed. After a set interval, the client repeats the process.

{% plantuml %}
Client -> Server: XHR 1
Server -> Client: Response with no data
Client -> Server: XHR 2
Server -> Client: Response with no data
Client -> Server: XHR 3
note right: New message becomes available
Server -> Client: Response with data
{% endplantuml %}
*Polling*

### Long-polling

Polling can be sufficient in scenarios where new data is available on the server
at fixed regular intervals set in advance. If that's not the case, then polling
becomes inefficient. *Long-polling* is a slight variation whereby a client sends
a request to the server but in this case, if the server has no new data, then it
sends an appropriate return code and holds the connection open. When new data
becomes available the server uses the held connection to send the response. The
connection is then closed and the client starts the process again.

{% plantuml %}
Client -> Server: XHR 1
note right: Hold connection until new message is ready
Server -> Client: Response with data, close connection
Client -> Server: XHR 2
note right: Hold connection until new message is ready
Server -> Client: Response with data, close connection
{% endplantuml %}
*Long-polling*

### Server-sent events
Server-sent events is a [technology][sse-spec] that allows HTTP clients to
subscribe to events originated from a server. On each new event, the server
pushes a notification to the client, holding the connection open until no new
notifications are expected to be pushed.

{% plantuml %}
Client -> Server: Send a request (ex: GET)
note right: Hold connection until new message is ready
Server -> Client: Send first message, keep connection open
Server -> Client: Send second message, keep connection open
Server -> Client: Send nth message, keep connection open
Server -> Client: No data left to push, close connection
{% endplantuml %}
*Server-sent events*

### Web sockets

## Source code

The complete source code of the example used in this post is available on the
weblog’s [Github repo][guzman-github], in the `jaxrs-sse/jaxrs-sse-ws` folder.

Java 8 and Apache Maven 3 are required to run the code.

## Components

The SSE demo application consists of a JAX-RS web resource and an Angular client
which will be covered in the next post.

### JAX-RS endpoint

```java
@GET
@Produces(SseFeature.SERVER_SENT_EVENTS)
public EventOutput getServerSentEvents() {
  final EventOutput eventOutput = new EventOutput();

  Runnable eventsTask = () -> {
    try {
      while (pathwayScanner.hasNext()) {
        final OutboundEvent.Builder eventBuilder = new OutboundEvent.Builder();
        eventBuilder.name("message-to-client");
        eventBuilder.data(String.class, "Task " + pathwayScanner.next() );
        final OutboundEvent event = eventBuilder.build();
        eventOutput.write(event);
        TimeUnit.SECONDS.sleep(1);
      }
    } catch (IOException | InterruptedException e) {
        throw new RuntimeException(
                "Error when writing the event.", e);
    } finally {
      try {
        eventOutput.close();
      } catch (IOException ioClose) {
        throw new RuntimeException(
                  "Error when closing the event output.", ioClose);
      }
    }
  };

  ExecutorService taskExecutor = Executors.newSingleThreadExecutor();

  taskExecutor.execute(eventsTask);
  taskExecutor.shutdown();

  return eventOutput;
}
```

## Testing

```java
Client client = ClientBuilder
            .newBuilder()
            .register(SseFeature.class)
            .build();
```

```java
final String patientPathway =
  "CHECK-IN NURSE DOCTOR FLEBOTOMIST RADIOLOGIST PHARMACIST";
final Scanner pathwayScanner = new Scanner(patientPathway);

EventInput eventInput = target
           .request()
           .get(EventInput.class);
while (!eventInput.isClosed()) {
  final InboundEvent inboundEvent = eventInput.read();
  if (inboundEvent == null) {
    break;
  }
  assertEquals(inboundEvent.getName(), "message-to-client");
  assertEquals(inboundEvent.readData(String.class),
    "Task " + pathwayScanner.next());
  System.out.println(inboundEvent.getName() + "; "
    + inboundEvent.readData(String.class));
}
```
Running `mvn verify` will generate the following output as it goes through the
pathway tasks.
```
Running guzman.weblog.jarxrs.sse.web.SeeAhoyIT
testGetServerSentEvents()
message-to-client; Task CHECK-IN
message-to-client; Task NURSE
message-to-client; Task DOCTOR
message-to-client; Task FLEBOTOMIST
message-to-client; Task RADIOLOGIST
message-to-client; Task PHARMACIST
```

## Further reading
- [Java API for RESTful Services (JAX-RS)][jaxrs-api]
- [Jersey 2x user guide][jersey-docs]
- [Server-sent events spec][sse-spec]

[guzman-github]: https://github.com/david-guzman/weblog-examples
[jaxrs-api]: https://jax-rs-spec.java.net/
[jersey-docs]: https://jersey.java.net/documentation/latest/index.html
[sse-spec]: https://www.w3.org/TR/2009/WD-eventsource-20091029/
