---
layout: post
title: "Server-sent events with JAX-RS (part 1: Intro)"
date: 2017-02-15
tags:
- JAX-RS
- SSE
- Server-sent events
---

Asynchronous access to data over HTTP has become an increasingly common
requirement in many applications, especially when integrating with web resources
in the cloud and streaming data to web clients.

One example could be a component inside a HTML5/JS application used in a hospital
clinic that displays information from patients as they go from checking in at
the reception desk until they collect their prescription from the pharmacist.

## Polling

XmlHttpRequest (XHR) API allows the asynchronous transfer of data from server to
client. *Polling* is one of the technologies that can be implemented with XHR
that allows the emulation of server-push behaviour. With the polling model, the
client sends repeated requests to the server for new data. IF the server does
not have any new data to send, then an appropriate return code is provided and
the connection is closed. After a set interval, the client repeats the process.

{% plantuml %}
Client -> Server: XHR 1
Server -> Client: Response with no data
Client -> Server: XHR 2
Server -> Client: Response with no data
Client -> Server: XHR 3
note right: New message becomes available
Server -> Client: Response with data
{% endplantuml %}
*Polling*

## Long-polling

Polling can be sufficient in scenarios where new data is available on the server
at fixed regular intervals set in advance. If that's not the case, then polling
becomes inefficient. *Long-polling* is a slight variation whereby a client sends
a request to the server but in this case, if the server has no new data, then it
sends an appropriate return code and holds the connection open. When new data
becomes available the server uses the held connection to send the response. The
connection is then closed and the client starts the process again.

{% plantuml %}
Client -> Server: XHR 1
note right: Hold connection until new message is ready
Server -> Client: Response with data, close connection
Client -> Server: XHR 2
note right: Hold connection until new message is ready
Server -> Client: Response with data, close connection
{% endplantuml %}
*Long-polling*

## Server-sent events

Server-sent events (SSE) is a technology that allows HTTP clients to
subscribe to events originated from a server. On each new event, the server
pushes a notification to the client, holding the connection open until no new
notifications are expected to be pushed. The client consumes the messages returned
by the server without closing the connection. Unlike Long-polling, SSE allows more
than one message per connection. SSE can work on plain HTTP requests or with a
Javascript API.

{% plantuml %}
Client -> Server: Send a request (ex: GET)
Server --> Client: Send handshake response
note right: Hold connection until new message is ready
Server -> Client: Send first message, keep connection open
Server -> Client: Send second message, keep connection open
Server -> Client: Send nth message, keep connection open
Server -> Client: No data left to push, close connection
{% endplantuml %}
*Server-sent events*

## Web sockets

Websockets is a protocol that unlike the previous 3 mechanisms, it provides
real full-duplex connection. Both parties, client (or initiator) and server can
sent data to each other. This technology is best suited for bidirectional
messaging applications, online collaboration tools, etc.

## When to use Server-sent events

Even though a Java API for Websockets is available in Java EE 7
([JSR 356][websockets-api]), there are many scenarios where having bidirectional
messaging is not required: displaying live feeds, status updates, monitoring data
where the client consumes the data passively. In these scenarios, a
unidirectional, server-push solution such as Server-sent events would be
suitable.

## Server-sent events with JAX-RS

SSE is available in [Jersey][jersey] as an extension to the reference
implementation of JAX-RS, which is part of Java EE. The next two posts will
describe a sample application using a JAX-RS web resource as a server component
and an Angular client component.

## Further reading
- [Server-sent events spec][sse-spec]
- [Java API for RESTful Services (JAX-RS)][jaxrs-api]

[jaxrs-api]: https://jax-rs-spec.java.net/
[jersey]: https://jersey.java.net/
[sse-spec]: https://www.w3.org/TR/2009/WD-eventsource-20091029/
[websockets-api]: https://java.net/projects/websocket-spec/
